# Simulation Modeling {#ch1}

**[Learning Objectives]{.smallcaps}**

-   To be able to describe what computer simulation is

-   To be able to discuss why simulation is an important analysis tool

-   To be able to list and describe the various types of computer
    simulations

-   To be able to describe a simulation methodology

In this book, you will learn how to model systems within a computer
environment in order to analyze system design configurations. The models
that you will build and exercise are called simulation models. When
developing a simulation model, the modeler attempts to represent the
system in such a way that the representation assumes or mimics the
pertinent outward qualities of the system. This representation is called
a simulation model. When you execute the simulation model, you are
performing a simulation. In other words, simulation is an instantiation
of the act of simulating. A simulation is often the next best thing to
observing the real system. If you have confidence in your simulation,
you can use it to infer how the real system will operate. You can then
use your inference to understand and improve the system's performance.

## Simulation Modeling {#simulation-modeling}
\index{simulation}
In general, simulations can take on many forms. Almost everyone is
familiar with the board game Life. In this game, the players imitate
life by going to college, getting a job, getting married, etc.Â and
finally retiring. This board game is a simulation of life. As another
example, the military performs war game exercises which are simulations
of battlefield conditions. Both of these simulations involve a physical
representation of the thing being simulated. The board game, the rules,
and the players represent the simulation model. The battlefield, the
rules of engagement, and the combatants are also physical
representations. No wishful thinking will make the simulations that you
develop in this book real. This is the first rule to remember about
simulation. A simulation is only a model (representation) of the real
thing. You can make your simulations as realistic as time and technology
allows, but they are not the real thing. As you would never confuse a
toy airplane with a real airplane, you should never confuse a simulation
of a system with the real system. You may laugh at this analogy, but as
you apply simulation to the real world you will see analysts who forget
this rule. Don't be one.

All the previous examples involved a physical representation or model
(real things simulating other real things). In this book, you will
develop computer models that simulate real systems. @ravindran1987and
define computer simulation as: "A numerical technique for conducting
experiments on a digital computer which involves logical and
mathematical relationships that interact to describe the behavior of a
system over time." \index{simulation!definition} Computer simulations provide an extra layer of
abstraction from reality that allows fuller control of the progression
of and the interaction with the simulation. In addition, even though
computer simulations are one step removed from reality, they are often
capable of providing constructs which cannot be incorporated into
physical simulations. For example, an airplane flight simulator can have
emergency conditions for which it would be too dangerous or costly to
provide in a physical based simulation training scenario. This
representational power of computer modeling is one of the main reasons
why computer simulation is used.

## Why Simulate?

Imagine trying to analyze the following situation. Patients arrive at an
emergency room. The arrival of the patients to the emergency department
occurs randomly and may vary with the day of the week and even the hour
of the day. The hospital has a triage station, where the arriving
patient's condition is monitored. If the patient's condition warrants
immediate attention, the patient is expedited to an emergency room bed
to be attended by a doctor and a nurse. In this case, the patient's
admitting information may be obtained from a relative. If the patient
does not require immediate attention, the patient goes through the
admitting process, where the patient's information is obtained. The
patient is then directed to the waiting room, to wait for allocation to
a room, a doctor, and a nurse. The doctors and nurses within the
emergency department must monitor the health of the patients by
performing tests and diagnosing the patient's symptoms. This occurs on a
periodic basis. As the patient receives care, the patient may be moved
to and require other facilities (MRI, X-ray, etc.). Eventually, the
patient is either discharged after receiving care or admitted to the
main hospital. The hospital is interested in conducting a study of the
emergency department in order to improve the care of the patients while
better utilizing the available resources. To investigate this situation,
you might need to understand the behavior of certain measures of
performance:

-   The average number of patients that are waiting.

-   The average waiting time of the patients and their average total
    time in the emergency department.

-   The average number rooms required per hour.

-   The average utilization of the doctors and nurses (and other
    equipment).

Because of the importance of emergency department operations, the
hospital has historical records available on the operation of the
department through its patient tracking system. With these records, you
might be able to estimate the current performance of the emergency
department. Despite the availability of this information, when
conducting a study of the emergency department you might want to propose
changes to how the department will operate (e.g. staffing levels) in the
future. Thus, you are faced with trying to predict the future behavior
of the system and its performance when making changes to the system. In
this situation, you cannot realistically experiment with the actual
system without possibly endangering the lives or care of the patients.
Thus, it would be better to model the system and to test the effect of
changes on the model. If the model has acceptable fidelity, then you can
infer how the changes will affect the real system. This is where
simulation techniques can be utilized.

If you are familiar with operations research and industrial engineering
techniques, you may be thinking that the emergency department can be
analyzed by using queueing models. Later chapters of this book will
present more about queueing models; however, for the present situation,
the application of queueing models will most likely be inadequate due to
the complex policies for allocating nurses, doctors, and beds to the
patients. In addition, the dynamic nature of this system (the
non-stationary arrivals, changing staffing levels, etc.) cannot be well
modeled with current analytical queueing models. Queueing models might
be used to analyze portions of the system, but a total analysis of the
dynamic behavior of the entire system is beyond the capability of these
types of models. But, a total analysis of the system is not beyond
simulation modeling.

Simulation may be the preferred modeling methodology if the understanding gained from
developing and using a simulation model is worth the time and cost
associated with developing and using the model. Good uses of simulation
include:

-   Understanding how complex interactions in the system effect
    performance.

-   Understanding how randomness effects performance.

-   Comparing a fixed set of design alternatives to determine which
    design meets the performance goals under which conditions

-   Training people to prepare them for dealing with events that may be
    disruptive to the actual system.

-   The model will be used repeatedly for decision making.

-   When the decision associated with the problem has a high cost so
    that the cost of building the model and evaluating the design is
    worth its development.

-   When the current system does not yet exist and you need to ensure
    that the chosen design will meet specifications.

Simulation modeling activities encapsulate all three major modeling methods of data analytics: descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive. Descriptive modeling uses historical data to describe what happened in order to understand past behavior of a system. Predictive modeling uses
historical data to develop models that help us understand future
behavior in order the answer what *may* happen. Descriptive modeling
summarizes past data for understanding. Predictive modeling uses past
data to predict future behavior. Prescriptive modeling indicates what should be done and is integral to answering questions involving system design. 

A simulation model is both a descriptive and predictive model. In addition, when coupled with stochastic optimization methods or a rigorous design process that evaluates and recommends designs, a simulation model becomes an integral part of the prescriptive modeling process. A
simulation model *describes* how a system works by encapsulating that
description within the operating runs/constructs of the model.  A
simulation model uses descriptive models (input models, summary
statistics).  A simulation model *predicts* future system response. A simulation model can be used to predict future behavior through running what-if scenarios. Simulation is inherently a predictive modeling methodology. Unlike other predictive modeling techniques found in data analytics, such as regression, neural networks, random forests, etc., simulation explicitly incorporates *domain* knowledge into the modeling activity by incorporating system operating behavior. The behavior is modeled through the physical and logical rules that apply to the relationships between the components of the system. Unlike pure statistical predictive models, simulation has the advantage of explicitly representing relationships rather than just relying on discovering relationships.
\index{simulation!advantages}
A key advantage of simulation modeling is that it has the capability of
modeling the entire system and its complex inter-relationships. The
representational power of simulation provides the flexible modeling that
is required for capturing complex processes. As a result, all the
important interactions among the different components of the system can
be accounted for within the model. The modeling of these interactions is
inherent in simulation modeling because simulation imitates the behavior
of the real system (as closely as necessary). The prediction of the
future behavior of the system is then achieved by monitoring the
behavior of different modeling scenarios as a function of simulated
time. 

Real world systems are often too complex for analytical models and
often too expensive to experiment with directly. Simulation models allow
the modeling of this complexity and enable low cost experimentation to
make inferences about how the actual system might behave.

## Types of Systems and Simulation Models

The main purpose of a simulation model is to allow observations about a
particular system to be collected as a function of time. So far the word
*system* has been used in much of the discussion, without formally
discussing what a system is. According to [@blanchard1990systems] a
system is a set of inter-related components working together towards a
common objective. The standard for systems engineering provides a deeper
definition: \index{system}  \index{system!definition}

> \"A system is a composite of people, products, and processes that
> provide a capability to satisfy stated needs. A complete system
> includes the facilities, equipment (hardware and software), materials,
> services, data, skilled personnel, and techniques required to achieve,
> provide, and sustain system effectiveness.\" [@command1991asd]

Figure\@ref(fig:ch1SystemConcept) illustrates the fact that a system is
embedded within an environment and that typically a system requires
inputs and produces output using internal components. How you model a
particular system will depend upon the intended use of the model and how
you perceive the system. The modeler's view of the system colors how
they conceptualize it. For example, for the emergency room situation,
\"What are the system boundaries? Should the ambulance dispatching and
delivery process be modeled? Should the details of the operating room be
modeled?" Clearly, the emergency room has these components, but your
conceptualization of it as a system may or may not include these items,
and thus, your decisions regarding how to conceptualize the system will
drive the level of abstraction within your modeling. An important point
to remember is that two perfectly logical and rational people can look
at the same thing and conceptualize that thing as two entirely different
systems based on their \"Weltanschauung\" or world view. \index{world view}

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=0.9\linewidth,height=0.9\textheight]{./figures2/ch1/ch1fig1} 

}

\caption{Conceptualization of a system}(\#fig:ch1SystemConcept)
\end{figure}

<!-- ![A Conceptualization of a -->
<!-- System](./figures/ch1/ch1fig1.jpg){#fig:ch1SystemConcept} -->

Because how you conceptualize a system drives your modeling, it is
useful to discuss some general system classifications. Systems might be
classified by whether or not they are man-made (e.g. manufacturing
system) or whether they are natural (e.g. solar system). A system can be
physical (e.g. an airport) or conceptual (e.g. a system of equations).
If stochastic or random behavior is an important component of the system
then the system is said to be stochastic, if not then it is considered
deterministic. One of the more useful ways to look at a system is
whether it changes with respect to time. If a system does not change
significantly with respect to time it is said to be static, else it is
called dynamic. If a system is dynamic, you might want to consider how
it evolves with respect to time. A dynamic system is said to be discrete
if the state of the system changes at discrete points in time. A dynamic
system is said to be continuous if the state of the system changes
continuously with time. This dichotomy is purely a function of your
level of abstraction. If conceptualizing a system as discrete, serves
our purposes then you can call the system discrete.
Figure \@ref(fig:ch1SystemTypes) illustrates this classification of
systems. This book primarily examines stochastic, dynamic, discrete
systems. \index{system!conceptualization}  \index{system!types}

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=0.9\linewidth,height=0.9\textheight]{./figures2/ch1/ch1fig2} 

}

\caption{General types of systems}(\#fig:ch1SystemTypes)
\end{figure}

<!-- ![General Types of -->
<!-- Systems](./figures/ch1/ch1fig2.jpg){#fig:ch1SystemTypes} -->
\index{system!stochastic} \index{system!deterministic} \index{system!discrete}  \index{system!continuous} \index{system!static} \index{system!dynamic} 
The main purpose of a simulation model is to allow observations about a
particular system to be gathered as a function of time. From that
standpoint, there are two distinct types of simulation: 1) discrete
event and 2) continuous.

Just as discrete systems change at discrete points in time, in discrete
event simulation observations are gathered at selected points in time
when certain changes take place in the system. These selected points in
time are called events. On the other hand, continuous simulation
requires that observations be collected continuously at every point in
time (or at least that the system is described for all points in time).
The types of models to be examined in this book are called
discrete-event simulation models.

To illustrate the difference between the two types of simulation,
contrast a fast food service counter with that of oil loading facility
that is filling tankers. In the fast food service counter system,
changes in the status of the system occur when a customer either arrives
to place an order or when the customer receives their food. At these two
events, measures such as queue length and waiting time will be affected.
At all the other points in time, these measures remain either unchanged
(e.g. queue length) or not yet ready for observation (e.g. waiting time
of the customer). For this reason, the system does not need to be
observed on a continuous basis. The system need only be observed at
selected discrete points in time, resulting in the applicability of a
discrete-event simulation model.

In the case of the oil tanker loading example, one of the measures of
performance is the amount of oil in each tanker. Because the oil is a
liquid, it cannot be readily divided into discrete components. That is,
it flows continuously into the tanker. It is not necessary (or
practical) to track each molecule of oil individually, when you only
care about the level of the oil in the tanker. In this case, a model of
the system must describe the rate of flow over time and the output of
the model is presented as a function of time. Systems such as these are
often modeled using differential equations. The solution of these
equations involves numerical methods that integrate the state of the
modeled system over time. This, in essence, involves dividing time into
small equal intervals and stepping through time.\index{system!continuous} 

Often both the discrete and continuous viewpoints are relevant in
modeling a system. For example, if oil tanker arrives at the port to be
filled, we have an arrival event that changes the state of the system.
This type of modeling situation is called combined continuous discrete
modeling. 

A system and our resulting model depends on how we characterize the state of the system. The **state** of a system is the set of properties/variables that
describe the system at any time $\{x_1(t), x_2(t), \dots\}$ where $x_1(t)$ is a
variable that represents a system property value at time $t$. Variables that take
on a countable set of values are **discrete**. Variables that take on an
uncountable set of values are said to be **continuous**. For discrete
variables, we can define a mapping from the set of integers to each
possible value. Even in the discrete case, there may be an infinite number of values. Continuous
variables are represented by the set of real numbers. That is, there are
an unaccountably infinite number of possible values that the variable can take on.
\index{system!discrete} 
A discrete system has all discrete variables in its state. A continuous
system has all continuous variables in its state. A combined
continuous-discrete system has both types of variables in defining its
state. Consider an airplane:

-   If we are interested in the number of parts operating to
    specification at any time t, then the state is $\{N_1(t), N_2(t), \dots \}$
    where $N_1(t) = 1$ if part 1 is operating and 0 if part 1 is not
    operating to specification. The state vector consists of all
    discrete variables. This is a discrete system.

-   If we are interested in the temperature of each part at time $t$, then
    the state is $\{T_1(t), T_2(t), \dots \}$, where $T_1(t)$ is the temperature
    in Celsius of part 1 at time $t$, etc. The state vector consists of
    all continuous variables. This is continuous system.

-   If we are interested in the velocity of a plane at time $t$ and the
    number of wheels deployed at time $t$, then the state is $\{v(t), n(t)\}$
    where $v(t)$ is the velocity of the plane in meters/second and $n(t)$ is
    $\{0,1,2,3,4\}$ wheels. Then the state vector consists of both
    continuous and discrete variables that change with time. This is a
    combined continuous/discrete system.

Static systems are systems for which time is not a significant factor. In other words, that the
state does not evolve over time. Dynamic systems are systems for which
system state changes with respect to time. In a deterministic system, the variables
are not governed by underlying random processes. In a stochastic
system, some of the variables are governed by underlying random
processes. Time can change continuously or at discrete points. When time
changes only at discrete points in time, we call these points, events.

Some simulation languages have modeling constructs for both
continuous and discrete modeling; however, this book does not cover the
modeling of continuous or combined continuous discrete systems. There are
many useful references on this topic. We will be modeling discrete-event dynamic stochastic systems in this textbook.

## Simulation: Descriptive or Prescriptive Modeling?

A descriptive model describes how a system behaves. Simulation is at its
heart a descriptive modeling technique. Simulation is used to depict the
behaviors or characteristics of existing or proposed systems. However, a
key use of simulation is to convey the *required* behaviors or
properties of a proposed system. In this situation, simulation is used
to prescribe a solution. A prescriptive model tells us what to do. In
other words, simulation can also be used for prescriptive modeling.
Figure \@ref(fig:ch1PrescriptiveSimulation) illustrates the concept of
using simulation to recommend a solution.

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=0.9\linewidth,height=0.9\textheight]{./figures2/ch1/ch1fig3} 

}

\caption{Using simulation for prescriptive analysis}(\#fig:ch1PrescriptiveSimulation)
\end{figure}

<!-- ![Using Simulation for Prescriptive -->
<!-- Analysis](./figures/ch1/ch1fig3.jpg){#fig:ch1PrescriptiveSimulation} -->
 \index{model!descriptive}  \index{model!prescriptive}  \index{model!predictive}
In the figure, a simulation model is used for predicting the behavior of
the system. Input models are used to characterize the system and its
environment. An evaluative model is used to evaluate the output of the
simulation model to understand how the output compares to desired goals.
The alternative generator is used to generate different scenarios to be
feed into the simulation model for evaluation. Through a feedback
mechanism the inputs can be changed based on the evaluation of the
outputs and eventually a recommended solution can be achieved.

For example, in the modeling a drive up pharmacy, suppose that the
probability of a customer waiting longer than 3 minutes in line had to
be less than 10%. To form design alternatives, the inputs (e.g. number
of pharmacists, possibly the service process) can be varied. Each
alternative can then be evaluated to see if the waiting time criteria is
met. In this simple situation, you might act as your own alternative
generator and the evaluative model is as simple as meeting a criteria;
however, in more complex models, there will often be hundreds of inputs
to vary and multiple competing objectives. In such situations,
simulation optimization and heuristic search methods are often used.
This is an active and important area of research within simulation.

## Randomness in Simulation
\index{randomness} 
In most real-life situations, the arrival process and the service
process occur in a random fashion. Even though the processes may be
random, it does not mean that you cannot describe or model the
randomness. To have any hope of simulating the situation, you must be
able to model the randomness. One of the ways to model this randomness
is to describe the phenomenon as a random variable governed by a
particular probability distribution. For example, if the arrivals to the
bank occur according to a Poisson process, then from probability theory
it is known that the distribution of inter-arrival times is an
exponential distribution. In general, information about how the
customers arrive must be secured either through direct observation of
the system or by using historical data. If neither source of information
is available, then some plausible assumptions must be made to describe
the random process by a probability model.

If historical data is available, there are two basic choices for how to
handle the modeling. The first choice is to develop a probability model
given the data. The second choice is to try to drive the simulation
directly from the historical data. The latter approach is not
recommended. First of all, it is extremely unlikely that the captured
data will be in a directly usable form. Secondly, it is even more
unlikely that the data will be able to adequately represent all the
modeling scenarios that you will need through the course of
experimenting with the model. For example, suppose that you only have 1
day's worth of arrival data, but you need to simulate a month's worth of
system operation. If you simply re-drive your simulation using the 1
day's worth of data, you are not simulating different days! It is much
more advisable to develop probability models either from historical data
or from data that you capture in developing your model. Appendix \@ref(app:idm)
discusses some of the tools and techniques for modeling probability
distributions.

Once a probability model has been developed, statistical theory provides
the means for obtaining random samples based on the use of uniformly
distributed random numbers on the interval (0,1). These random samples
are then used to map the future occurrence of an event on the time
scale. For example, if the inter-arrival time is exponential then a
random sample drawn from that distribution would represent the time
interval until the occurrence of the next arrival. The process of
generating random numbers and random variables within simulation is
presented in Appendix \@ref(app:rnrv).

## Simulation Languages
\index{simulation!languages}
Discrete event simulation normally involves a tremendous volume of
computation. Consequently, the use of computers to carry out these
computations is essential; however, the volume of computations is not
the only obstacle in simulation. If you consider the bank teller example
discussed in the previous sections, you will discover that it involves a
complex logical structure that requires special expertise before it can
be translated into a computer model. Attempting to implement the
simulation model, from scratch, in a general purpose language such as
FORTRAN, Visual Basic, C/C++, or Java will require above average
programming skills. In the absence of specialized libraries for these
languages that try to relive the user from some of the burden,
simulation as a tool would be relegated to \"elite\" programmers.
Luckily, the repetitive nature of computations in simulation allows the
development of computer libraries that are applicable to simulation
modeling situations. For example, libraries or packages must be
available for ordering and processing events chronologically, as well as
generating random numbers and automatically collecting statistics. Such
a [library](https://git.uark.edu/jslfork/JSL) for simulating discrete-event systems in Java is available from the author, see [@Rossetti2008aa] and the related [book](https://rossetti.git-pages.uark.edu/jslbookdownbook/).

The computational power and storage capacity of computers has motivated
the development of specialized simulation languages. Some languages have
been developed for continuous or discrete simulations. Others can be
used for combined continuous and discrete modeling. All simulation
languages provide certain standard programming facilities and will
differ in how the user will take advantage of these facilities. There is
normally some trade-off between how flexible the language is in
representing certain modeling situations. Usually, languages that are
highly flexible in representing complex situations require more work
(and care) by the user to account for how the model logic is developed.
Some languages are more programming oriented (e.g. SIMSCRIPT) and others
are more \"drag and drop\" (e.g.Â ProModel, Arena, etc. ).

The choice of a simulation language is a difficult one. There are many
competing languages, each having their own advantages and disadvantages.
The Institute for Operations Research and Management Science (INFORMS)
often has a yearly product review covering commercial simulation
languages, see for example (http://lionhrtpub.com/orms/). In addition to
this useful comparison, you should examine the Winter Simulation
Conference (www.wintersim.org). The conference has hands on exhibits of
simulation software and the conference proceedings often have tutorials
for the various software packages. Past proceedings have been made
available electronically through the generous support of the INFORMS
Society for Simulation (http://www.informs-sim.org/wscpapers.html).

was chosen for this textbook because of the author's experience
utilizing the software, its ease of use, and the availability of student
versions of the software. While all languages have flaws, using a
simulation language is essential in performing high performance
simulation studies. Most, if not all simulation companies have strong
support to assist the user in learning their software. has a strong
academic and industrial user base and is very competitive in the
simulation marketplace. Once you learn one simulation language well, it
is much easier to switch to other languages and to understand which
languages will be more appropriate for certain modeling situations.

is fundamentally a process description based language. That is, when
using , the modeler describes the process that an \"entity\" experiences
while flowing through or using the elements of the system. You will
learn about how facilitates process modeling throughout this textbook.

## Simulation Methodology {#ch1:sec:simMeth}
\index{simulation!methodology}
This section presents a brief overview of the steps of simulation
modeling by discussing the process in the context of a methodology. A
methodology is simply a series of steps to follow. Since simulation
involves systems modeling, a simulation methodology based on the general
precepts of solving a problem through systems analysis is presented
here. A general methodology for solving problems can be stated as
follows: \index{DEGREE} 

1.  Define the problem

2.  Establish measures of performance for evaluation

3.  Generate alternative solutions

4.  Rank alternative solutions

5.  Evaluate and Iterate during process \index{iteration}

6.  Execute and evaluate the solution

This methodology can be referred to by using the first letter of each
step. The DEGREE methodology for problem solving represents a series of
steps that can be used during the problem solving process. The first
step helps to ensure that you are solving the right problem. The second
step helps to ensure that you are solving the problem for the right
reason, i.e. your metrics must be coherent with your problem. Steps 3
and 4 ensure that the analyst looks at and evaluates multiple solutions
to the problem. In other words, these steps help to ensure that you
develop the right solution to the problem. A good methodology recognizes
that the analyst needs to evaluate how well the methodology is doing. In
step 5, the analyst evaluates how the process is proceeding and allows
for iteration. Iteration is an important concept that is foreign to many
modelers. The concept of iteration recognizes that the problem solving
process can be repeated until the desired degree of modeling fidelity
has been achieved. Start the modeling at a level that allows it to be
initiated and do not try to address the entire situation in each of the
steps. Start with small models that work and build them up until you
have reached your desired goals. It is important to get started and get
something established on each step and continually go back in order to
ensure that the model is representing reality in the way that you
intended. The final step is often over looked. Simulation is often used
to recommend a solution to a problem. Step 6 indicates that if you have
the opportunity you should execute the solution by implementing the
decisions. Finally, you should always follow up to ensure that the
projected benefits of the solution were obtained.

The DEGREE problem solving methodology should serve you well; however,
simulation involves certain unique actions that must be performed during
the general overall problem solving process. When applying DEGREE to a
problem that may require simulation, the general DEGREE approach needs
to be modified to explicitly consider how simulation will interact with
the overall problem solving process.

Figure \@ref(fig:ch1SimMethodology) represents a refined general
methodology for applying simulation to problem solving.

1.  Problem Formulation  \index{problem formulation}

    1.  Define the problem

    2.  Define the system

    3.  Establish performance metrics

    4.  Build conceptual model

    5.  Document model assumptions

2.  Simulation Model Building

    1.  Model translation

    2.  Input data modeling

    3.  Verification \index{verification}

    4.  Validation  \index{validation}

3.  Experimental Design and Analysis \index{experimental design}

    1.  Preliminary Runs

    2.  Final experiments

    3.  Analysis of results

4.  Evaluate and Iterate

    1.  Documentation

    2.  Model manual

    3.  User manual

5.  Implementation
\index{problem formulation}
The first phase, problem formulation, captures the essence of the first
two steps in the DEGREE process. The second phase, model building,
captures the essence of step 3 of the DEGREE process. When building
models, you are either explicitly or implicitly developing certain
design alternatives. The third phase, experimental design and analysis,
encapsulates some of steps 3 and 4 of the DEGREE process. In designing
experiments, design alternatives are specified and when analyzing
experiments their worth is being evaluated with respect to problem
objectives. The fourth phase, evaluate and iterate, captures the notion
of iteration. Finally, the fifth and sixth phases, documentation and
implementation complete the simulation process. Documentation is
essential when trying to ensure the ongoing and future use of the
simulation model, and implementation recognizes that simulation projects
often fail if there is no follow through on the recommended solutions.

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=0.9\linewidth,height=0.9\textheight]{./figures2/ch1/ch1fig4} 

}

\caption{General simulation project methodology}(\#fig:ch1SimMethodology)
\end{figure}

<!-- ![General Simulation -->
<!-- Methodology](./figures/ch1/ch1fig4.jpg){#fig:ch1SimMethodology -->
<!-- width="\\textwidth"} -->

The problem formulation phase of the study consists of five primary
activities:

1.  Defining the problem

2.  Defining the system

3.  Establishing performance metrics.

4.  Building conceptual models

5.  Documenting modeling assumptions

A problem starts with a perceived need. These activities are useful in
developing an appreciation for and an understanding of what needs to be
solved. The basic output of the problem definition activity is a problem
definition statement. A problem definition statement is a narrative
discussion of the problem. A problem definition statement is necessary
to accurately and concisely represent the problem for the analyst and
for the problem stakeholders. This should include all the required
assumptions made during the modeling process. It is important to
document your assumptions so that you can examine their effect on the
model during the verification, validation, and experimental analysis
steps of the methodology. This ensures that the problem is well
understood and that all parties agree upon the nature of the problem and
the goals of the study. The general goals of a simulation study often
include:

-   Comparison: To compare system alternatives and their performance
    measures across various factors (decision variables) with respect to
    some objectives

-   Optimization: This is a special case of comparison in which you try
    to find the system configuration that optimizes performance subject
    to constraints.

-   Prediction: To predict the behavior of the system at some future
    point in time.

-   Investigation: To learn about and gain insight into the behavior of
    the system given various inputs.

These general goals will need to be specialized to the problem under
study. The problem definition should include a detailed description of
the objectives of the study, the desired outputs from the model, and the
types of scenarios to be examined or decisions to be made.
\index{system!definition}
The second activity of this phase produces a definition of the system. A
system definition statement is necessary to accurately and concisely
define the system, particularly its boundaries. The system definition
statement is a narrative, which often contains a pictorial
representation of the major elements of the system. This ensures that
the simulation study is focused on the appropriate areas of interest to
the stakeholders and that the scope of the project is well understood.

When defining the problem and the system, one should naturally begin to
develop an understanding of how to measure system performance. The third
activity of problem formulation makes this explicit by encouraging the
analyst to define the required performance measures for the model. To
meaningfully compare alternative scenarios, objective and measurable
metrics describing the performance of the system are necessary. The
performance metrics should include quantitative statistical measures
from any models used in the analysis (e.g. simulation models),
quantitative measures from the systems analysis, (e.g. cost/benefits),
and qualitative assessments (e.g. technical feasibility, human,
operational feasibility). The focus should be placed on the performance
measures that are considered to be the most important to system
decision-makers and tied directly to the objectives of the simulation
study. Evaluation of alternatives can then proceed in an objective and
unbiased manner to determine which system scenario performs the best
according to the decision maker's preferences.

The problem definition statement, the system definition statement, and
explicit performance metrics set the stage for more detailed modeling.
These activities should be captured in a written form. Within this text,
you will develop models of certain "ready-made" book problems. One way
to accomplish the problem formulation phase of a simulation study is to
consider writing yourself a \"book problem\". You will need enough
detail in these documents that a simulation analyst (you) can develop a
model in any simulation language for the given situation. The example
problem in Chapter \@ref(ch8) represents an excellent sample of problem and system
definition statements. If you have the opportunity to do a "real-life"
project as part of your study of simulation, you might want to utilize
the book problems in this text and the example in
Chapter \@ref(ch8) for how
to write reasonable problem/system definition statements.

With a good understanding of the problem and of the system under study,
you should be ready to begin your detailed model formulations. Model
formulation does not mean a computer program. You should instead use
conceptual modeling tools: conceptual diagrams, flow charts, etc. prior
to any use of software to implement a model. The purpose of conceptual
modeling tools is to convey a more detailed system description so that
the model may be translated into a computer representation. General
descriptions help to highlight the areas and processes of the system
that the model will simulate. Detailed descriptions assist in simulation
model development and coding efforts. Some relevant diagramming
constructs include:

1.  Context Diagrams: A context diagram assists in conveying the general
    system description. The diagram is a pictorial representation of the
    system that often includes flow patterns typically encountered.
    Context diagrams are often part of the system description document.
    There are no rules for developing context diagrams. If you have an
    artistic side, here is your opportunity to shine!

2.  Activity Diagrams: An activity diagram is a pictorial representation
    of the process for an entity and its interaction with resources
    while within the system. If the entity is a temporary entity (i.e.
    it flows through the system) the activity diagram is called an
    activity flow diagram. If the entity is permanent (i.e. it remains
    in the system throughout its life) the activity diagram is called an
    activity cycle diagram. Activity diagrams will be used extensively
    within this text.  \index{activity diagram}

3.  Software engineering diagrams: Because simulation entails software
    development, the wide-variety of software engineering diagramming
    techniques can be utilized to provide information for the model
    builder. Diagrams such as flow charts, database diagrams, IDEF (ICAM
    DEFinition language) diagrams, UML (unified modeling language)
    diagrams, state charts, etc are all useful in documenting complex
    modeling situations. These techniques assist development and coding
    efforts by focusing attention on describing, and thus understanding,
    the elements within the system. Within this text, activity diagrams
    will be augmented with some simple flow chart symbols and some
    simple state diagrams will be used to illustrate a variety of
    concepts.

In your modeling, you should start with an easy conceptual model that
captures the basic aspects and behaviors of the system. Then, you should
begin to add details, considering additional functionality. Finally, you
should always remember that the complexity of the model has to remain
proportional to the quality of the available data and the degree of
validity necessary to meet the objectives of the study. In other words,
don't try to model the world! \index{conceptual model}

After developing a solid conceptual model of the situation, simulation
model building can begin. During the simulation model building phase,
alternative system design configurations are developed based on the
previously developed conceptual models. Additional project planning is
also performed to yield specifications for the equipment, resources, and
timing required for the development of the simulation models. The
simulation models used to evaluate the alternative solutions are then
developed, verified, validated, and prepared for analysis. Within the
context of a simulation project this process includes:

-   Input Data Preparation: Input data is analyzed to determine the
    nature of the data and to determine further data collection needs.
    Necessary data is also classified into several areas. This
    classification establishes different aspects of the model that are
    used in model development.

-   Model Translation: Description of the procedure for coding the
    model, including timing and general procedures and the translation
    of the conceptual models into computer simulation program
    representations.

-   Verification: Verification of the computer simulation model is
    performed to determine whether or not the program performs as
    intended. To perform model verification, model debugging is
    performed to locate any errors in the simulation code. Errors of
    particular importance include improper flow control or entity
    creation, failure to release resources, and logical/arithmetic
    errors or incorrectly observed statistics. Model debugging also
    includes scenario repetition utilizing identical random number
    seeds, \"stressing\" the model through a sensitivity analysis
    (varying factors and their levels) to ensure compliance with
    anticipated behavior, and testing of individual modules within the
    simulation code. \index{verification}

-   Validation: Validation of the simulation model is performed to
    determine whether or not the simulation model adequately represents
    the real system. The simulation model is shown to personnel (of
    various levels) associated with the system in question. Their input
    concerning the realism of the model is critical in establishing the
    validity of the simulation. In addition, further observations of the
    system are performed to ensure model validity with respect to actual
    system performance. A simple technique is to statistically compare
    the output of the simulation model to the output from the real
    system and to analyze whether there is a significant (and practical)
    difference between the two. \index{validation}
\index{model translation}
Model translation will be a large component of each chapter as you learn
how to develop simulation models. Verification and validation techniques
will not be a major component of this text, primarily because the models
will be examples made for educational purposes. This does not mean that
you should ignore this important topic. You are encouraged to examine
many of the useful references on validation, see for example
[@balci1997principles] and [@balci1998verification]. 

After you are confident that your model has been verified and validated
to suit your purposes, you can begin to use the model to perform
experiments that investigate the goals and objectives of the project.
Preliminary simulation experiments should be performed to set the
statistical parameters associated with the main experimental study. The
experimental method should use the simulation model to generate
benchmark statistics of current system operations. The simulation model
is then altered to conform to a potential scenario and is re-run to
generate comparative statistics. This process is continued, cycling
through suggested scenarios and generating comparative statistics to
allow evaluation of alternative solutions. In this manner, objective
assessments of alternative scenarios can be made.

For a small set of alternatives, this "one at a time" approach is
reasonable; however, often there are a significant number of design
factors that can affect the performance of the model. In this situation,
the analyst should consider utilizing formal experimental design
techniques. This step should include a detailed specification of the
experimental design (e.g. factorial, etc) and any advanced output
analysis techniques (e.g. batching, initialization bias prevention,
variance reduction techniques, multiple comparison procedures, etc.)
that may be required during the execution of the experiments. During
this step of the process, any quantitative models developed during the
previous steps are exercised. Within the context of a simulation
project, the computer simulation model is exercised at each of the
design points within the stipulated experimental design.

Utilizing the criteria specified by system decision-makers, and
utilizing the simulation model's statistical results, alternative
scenarios should then be analyzed and ranked. A methodology should be
used to allow the comparison of the scenarios that have multiple
performance measures that trade-off against each other. \index{trade-off}

If you are satisfied that the simulation has achieved your objectives
then you should document and implement the recommended solutions. If
not, you can iterate as necessary and determine if any additional data,
models, experimentation, or analysis is needed to achieve your modeling
objectives. Good documentation should consist of at least two parts: a
technical manual, which can be used by the same analyst or by other
analysts, and a user manual. A good technical manual is very useful when
the project has to be modified, and it can be a very important
contribution to software reusability and portability. The approach to
documenting the example models in this text can be used as an example
for how to document your models. In addition to good model development
documentation, often the simulation model will be used by non-analysts.
In this situation, a good user manual for how to use and exercise the
model is imperative. The user manual is a product for the user who may
not be an expert in programming or simulation issues; therefore
clearness and simplicity should be its main characteristics. If within
the scope of the project, the analyst should also develop implementation
plans and follow through with the installation and integration of the
proposed solutions. After implementation, the project should be
evaluated as to whether or not the proposed solution met the intended
objectives.

## Organization of the Book

This chapter introduced some of the basic concepts in simulation.  Chapter \@ref(ch2) will begin our exploration of discrete event simulation and introduce you to the key modeling tool, Arena. Chapter \@ref(ch3) introduces the basic statistical concepts that you will need to begin to understand output generated from a simulation.  Chapter \@ref(ch4) presents intermediate process modeling within Arena.  After these first four chapters, you will have a solid understanding of how to apply Arena to model many realistic situations via simulation. Then, Chapter \@ref(ch5) returns to a statistical concept within simulation in order to prepare you to analyze the results of a infinite horizon simulation. Chapter \@ref(ch6) presents more advanced process modeling, including an introduction to modeling non-stationary situations. Chapter \@ref(ch7) includes the modeling of material handling and movement of within a system. Finally, Chapter \@ref(ch8), the final chapter, illustrates the use of simulation on a practical case
study. Through this study you will have a solid foundation for
understanding what it takes to model more realistic systems found in
practice.

Along with the basic modeling chapters a number of useful appendices have been provided.  Appendix \@ref(app:rnrv) presents the mathematical basis for random number generation and for generating random variables from probability distributions. Appendix \@ref(app:idm) describes the basic processes for fitting probability distributions. Because simulation often involves the modeling of waiting systems, Appendix \@ref(app:qtAndInvT) provides an overview of the analytical analysis of single queue systems and many of the important formulas that an analyst may need, especially if they use queueing theory to verify and validate their simulation models. A number of other useful appendices are provided to cover probability distributions, common Arena constructs, and aspects of programming within Arena.

Example models using are used throughout this text. The models are
supplied with the files that accompany the text. You should explore the
completed models as they are discussed within the text; however, in
order to get the most out of these examples, you should try to follow
along and attempt to build the models. In some cases, you can start from
scratch. In other cases, a starting model might be given so that you can
perform the enhancements. Working through these examples is very
important to developing a good understanding of the material. 

Simulation is a tool that can assist analysts in improving
system performance. There are many other aspects of simulation besides
that will be considered within this text. I hope that you will find this
a useful and interesting experience.

\clearpage
## Exercises

***
\BeginKnitrBlock{exercise}
<span class="exercise" id="exr:ch1P1"><strong>(\#exr:ch1P1) </strong></span>Using the resources at
(http://www.informs-sim.org/wscpapers.html) find an application of
simulation to a real system and discuss why simulation was important to
the analysis.
\EndKnitrBlock{exercise}

***
\BeginKnitrBlock{exercise}
<span class="exercise" id="exr:ch1P2"><strong>(\#exr:ch1P2) </strong></span>Customers arrive to a gas
station with two pumps. Each pump can reasonably accommodate a total of
two cars. If all the space for the cars is full, potential customers
will balk (leave without getting gas). What measures of performance will
be useful in evaluating the effectiveness of the gas station? Describe
how you would collect the inter-arrival and service times of the
customers necessary to simulate this system.
\EndKnitrBlock{exercise}

***
\BeginKnitrBlock{exercise}
<span class="exercise" id="exr:ch1P3"><strong>(\#exr:ch1P3) </strong></span>Classify the systems as either being discrete or continuous:

- Electrical Capacitor (You are interested in modeling the amount of
current in a capacitor at any time $t$).

- On-line gaming system. (You are interested in modeling the number of
people playing Halo 4 at any time $t$.)

- An airport. (You are interested in modeling the percentage of flights
that depart late on any given day).

\EndKnitrBlock{exercise}

***
\BeginKnitrBlock{exercise}
<span class="exercise" id="exr:ch1P4"><strong>(\#exr:ch1P4) </strong></span>Classify the systems as either being discrete or continuous:

- Parking lot

- Level of gas in Fayetteville shale deposit

- Printed circuit board manufacturing facility

\EndKnitrBlock{exercise}

***
\BeginKnitrBlock{exercise}
<span class="exercise" id="exr:ch1P5"><strong>(\#exr:ch1P5) </strong></span>Classify the systems as either being discrete or continuous:

- Classify the systems as either being discrete or continuous:

- Elevator system (You are interested in modeling the number of people
waiting on each floor and traveling within the elevators.)

- Judicial system (You are interested in modeling the number of cases
waiting for trial.)

- The in-air flight path of an airplane as it moves from an origin to a
destination.

\EndKnitrBlock{exercise}

***
\BeginKnitrBlock{exercise}
<span class="exercise" id="exr:ch1P6"><strong>(\#exr:ch1P6) </strong></span>What is model conceptualization? Give an example of something that might
be produced during model conceptualization.
\EndKnitrBlock{exercise}

***
\BeginKnitrBlock{exercise}
<span class="exercise" id="exr:ch1P7"><strong>(\#exr:ch1P7) </strong></span>The act of implementing the model in computer code, including timing and
general procedures and the representation of the conceptual model into a
computer simulation program is called: $\underline{\hspace{2in}}$.
\EndKnitrBlock{exercise}

***
\BeginKnitrBlock{exercise}
<span class="exercise" id="exr:ch1P8"><strong>(\#exr:ch1P8) </strong></span>Which of the following does the problem formulation phase of simulation
not include? 
- Define the system 
- Establish performance metrics
- Verification 
- Build conceptual models
\EndKnitrBlock{exercise}

***
\BeginKnitrBlock{exercise}
<span class="exercise" id="exr:ch1P9"><strong>(\#exr:ch1P9) </strong></span>*Fill in the blank* The general goals of a simulation include the  $\underline{\hspace{2in}}$ of system alternatives and their
performance measures across various factors (decision variables) with
respect to some objectives.
\EndKnitrBlock{exercise}

***
\BeginKnitrBlock{exercise}
<span class="exercise" id="exr:ch1P10"><strong>(\#exr:ch1P10) </strong></span>*Fill in the blank* The general goals of a simulation include the $\underline{\hspace{2in}}$ of system behavior at some future point
in time.
\EndKnitrBlock{exercise}

***
\BeginKnitrBlock{exercise}
<span class="exercise" id="exr:ch1P11"><strong>(\#exr:ch1P11) </strong></span>*True* or *False* Verification of the simulation model is performed to
determine whether the simulation model adequately represents the real
system.
\EndKnitrBlock{exercise}

***
